fix(linux): use IP*_PMTUDISC_PROBE (#14)
marten-seemann/draft-seemann-tsvwg-udp-fragmentation: draft-seemann-tsvwg-udp-fragmentation.md

## Linux

> In order to disable Linux's own Path MTU Discovery, one uses the socket option

Reviewer: I don't think Linux runs PMTUD on its own, in the sense that it sends probe packets on its own. Even with IP_PMTUDISC_DO, it would still be the application's responsibility to send a probe packet, the Linux kernel would just update its MTU tracking for this 4-tuple when it receives an ICMP packet.

Therefore, I'd prefer to say something like this:
1. IP_PMTUDISC_DO turns on the DF bit, and enables the processing of ICMP packets by the kernel
2. IP_PMTUDISC_PROBE turns on the DF bit, and disables the processing of ICMP packets by the kernel

We can then point out that IP_PMTUDISC_DO is problematic from a security standpoint (and maybe cite the draft in dnsops?).

Author: @marten-seemann what do you think of [a0d071d](https://github.com/marten-seemann/draft-seemann-tsvwg-udp-fragmentation/pull/14/commits/a0d071d3eda9a9acb61338abacfbaf8c29f2d532)?

> We can then point out that IP_PMTUDISC_DO is problematic from a security standpoint (and maybe cite the draft in dnsops?).

Are you referring to https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ietf-dnsop-avoid-fragmentation/ ? I don't see it describing the attack, nor the socket options in depth. Am I missing something?

Author: Friendly ping @marten-seemann. Thoughts on the new commit? Which "dnsops draft" are you referring to?

Reviewer: I think it's an RFC now: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/rfc9715/

Author: I don't think RFC 9715 is a good source to link. It does mention the ICMP NEEDFRAG attack, but neither provides details, nor does it link to a more detailed description.

> By comparison, the TCP protocol stack controls packet size and avoids IP fragmentation under ICMP NEEDFRAG attacks.

https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9715.html#section-7.3

Instead, I found the attack described in RFC 5927, albeit under a different name, i.e. _Blind Performance-Degrading Attack_.

> As discussed in both [[RFC1191](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc1191)] and [[RFC1981](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc1981)], the Path-MTU Discovery
   mechanism can be used to attack TCP.  An attacker could send a
   crafted ICMPv4 "Destination Unreachable, fragmentation needed and DF
   set" packet (or their ICMPv6 counterpart) to the sending system,
   advertising a small Next-Hop MTU.  As a result, the attacked system
   would reduce the size of the packets it sends for the corresponding
   connection accordingly.
> ...

https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5927.html#section-7

I added a link in https://github.com/marten-seemann/draft-seemann-tsvwg-udp-fragmentation/pull/14/commits/f77c3c0034e56e27282e7ebd8520fa500b0c0661. @marten-seemann let me know what you think.

of level IPPROTO_IP with name IP_MTU_DISCOVER with value IP_PMTUDISC_PROBE for
IPv4, and socket option of level IPPROTO_IPV6 with name IPV6_MTU_DISCOVER with
value IPV6_PMTUDISC_PROBE for IPv6.

> For dual-stack sockets, both IPv4 and IPv6 socket options can be set

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For dual-stack sockets, both IPv4 and IPv6 socket options should be set
```

Reviewer: "should be set independently" doesn't make a lot of sense to me. I think "can" as better, as we want to point out that on Linux, one does not influence the other (this is different on macOS, for example).

Reviewer 2: I think you're right grammatically. My concern is that "can" fails to actually recommend that people do so.

independently.

> In addition, for IPv6, to prevent local fragmentation when sending packets

Reviewer: Doesn't IPV6_PMTUDISC_PROBE already do that?

Author: My initial version described the error reporting of `IPV6_DONTFRAG` only. @Ralith suggested the "prevent [local] fragmentation" in https://github.com/marten-seemann/draft-seemann-tsvwg-udp-fragmentation/pull/14#discussion_r1875042458.

Reviewer: Don't both of them return an error? Does of them just silently swallow packets if the kernel believes they're too large?

Author: > Does of them just silently swallow packets if the kernel believes they're too large?

That is my understanding of the code below, yes:

https://github.com/torvalds/linux/blob/master/net/ipv6/ip6_output.c#L1477

Author: @marten-seemann with the above, how do you want to proceed?

Reviewer: I tried this out, and I found that the kernel rejects packets larger than the interface MTU for both IPV6_PMTUDISC_PROBE and IPV6_PMTUDISC_DO, so it seems like IPV6_DONTFRAG is not needed at all.

IPv6 fragmentation only happens if neither IPV6_PMTUDISC_PROBE or IPV6_PMTUDISC_DO is set.

However, here's an interesting thing: If I bump the interface MTU beyond 1500 bytes, and try to send a 1600 bytes packet, I immediately (without having sent any packet / received any ICMP packet) get a "message too large" error when using IPV6_PMTUDISC_DO (IPV6_PMTUDISC_PROBE sends the large packet). I don't have any explanation why that happens.

When IPV6_PMTUDISC_PROBE is set, I only receive a "message too large" error if the packet size exceeds the interface MTU.

Reviewer: My understanding is IPV6_DONTFRAG only has any impact when IPV6_PMTUDISC_DONT is used. Since we're not concerned with that, I think we can remove this sentence.

Author: Thanks for testing @marten-seemann.

> However, here's an interesting thing: If I bump the interface MTU beyond 1500 bytes, and try to send a 1600 bytes packet, I immediately (without having sent any packet / received any ICMP packet) get a "message too large" error when using IPV6_PMTUDISC_DO (IPV6_PMTUDISC_PROBE sends the large packet). I don't have any explanation why that happens.

:open_mouth: 

I guess with recommending `IPV6_PMTUDISC_PROBE`, the above is of no concern to us.

> My understanding is IPV6_DONTFRAG only has any impact when IPV6_PMTUDISC_DONT is used. Since we're not concerned with that, I think we can remove this sentence.

Agreed. Removed. See https://github.com/marten-seemann/draft-seemann-tsvwg-udp-fragmentation/pull/14/commits/1bff50bed934c7f2164a2d5ccae644cd050db7a0.

> larger than the interface MTU, one sets the socket option of level IPPROTO_IPV6

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
larger than the interface MTU, set the socket option of level IPPROTO_IPV6
```

## Linux

In order to send packets larger than the observed Path MTU and to disable
Linux's own Path MTU Discovery, one uses the socket option of level IPPROTO_IP
with name IP_MTU_DISCOVER with value IP_PMTUDISC_PROBE for IPv4, and socket
option of level IPPROTO_IPV6 with name IPV6_MTU_DISCOVER with value

> IPV6_PMTUDISC_PROBE for IPv6.

Reviewer: Isn't this backwards? The kernel doesn't even try to observe the Path MTU if IP_PMTUDISC_PROBE is set, it only does that for IP_PMTUDISC_DO.

In addition, to receive errors when sending packets larger than the interface
MTU, one sets the socket option of level IPPROTO_IP with name IP_DONTFRAG
for IPv4 and socket option of level IPPROTO_IPV6 with name IPV6_DONTFRAG on

> IPv6.

Author: Again my understanding of https://github.com/torvalds/linux/blob/e70140ba0d2b1a30467d4af6bcfe761327b9ec95/net/ipv6/ip6_output.c#L1477.

Reviewer 2: I would word this as "to prevent fragmentation" rather than "to receive errors", since fragmentation is the hazard we're specifically seeking to avoid.

> I am not sure one should set it on v4.

Linux doesn't have an IPv4 DONTFRAG, afaict.

Reviewer 2: Also, how certain are you that `mtu` is necessarily the *interface* mtu and not some guess of the path MTU?

Reviewer: I'm still confused about IPV6_DONTFRAG, but with IP_PMTUDISC_DO the kernel processes ICMP packets, and refuses to send packets larger than the MTU advertised in that packet. 

And since ICMP packets are not end-to-end authenticated, this was what caused https://github.com/quic-go/quic-go/security/advisories/GHSA-px8v-pp82-rcvr.

Author: > Also, how certain are you that `mtu` is necessarily the _interface_ mtu and not some guess of the path MTU?

According to https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/ip.7.html:

```
              Path MTU discovery value   Meaning
              IP_PMTUDISC_WANT           Use per-route settings.
              IP_PMTUDISC_DONT           Never do Path MTU Discovery.
              IP_PMTUDISC_DO             Always do Path MTU Discovery.
              IP_PMTUDISC_PROBE          Set DF but ignore Path MTU.
```

Thus I assume with `IP_PMTUDISC_PROBE` the path MTU is always ignored. Does that make sense @Ralith?

Reviewer 2: :+1:
